[sync rke2-docs] Add instructions for using HAProxy (#191)
rancher/rke2-product-docs: versions/latest/modules/en/pages/networking/cluster_loadbalancer.adoc

External load-balancers can be used to provide a fixed registration address for registering nodes, or for external access to the Kubernetes API Server. For exposing LoadBalancer Services, external load-balancers can be used alongside or instead of ServiceLB, but in most cases, replacement load-balancer controllers such as MetalLB or Kube-VIP are a better choice.
====

== Prerequisites

All nodes in this example are running Ubuntu 24.04.

Three nodes will be used as servers and have hostnames and IPs of:

* server-1: `10.10.10.50`
* server-2: `10.10.10.51`
* server-3: `10.10.10.52`

Two additional nodes for load balancing are configured with hostnames and IPs of:

* lb-1: `10.10.10.98`
* lb-2: `10.10.10.99`

Three additional nodes exist with hostnames and IPs of:

* agent-1: `10.10.10.101`
* agent-2: `10.10.10.102`
* agent-3: `10.10.10.103`

== Setup Load Balancer

https://www.haproxy.org/[HAProxy] is an open source option that provides a TCP load balancer. It also supports HA for the load balancer itself, ensuring redundancy at all levels. See https://docs.haproxy.org/2.8/intro.html[HAProxy Documentation] for more info.

> Additionally, we will use Keepalived to generate a virtual IP (VIP) that will be used to access the cluster. See https://www.keepalived.org/documentation/[Keepalived Documentation] for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, Keepalived is used to generate a virtual IP (VIP) for accessing the cluster. See https://www.keepalived.org/documentation/[Keepalived Documentation] for more information.
```

    server server-1 10.10.10.50:9345 check
    server server-2 10.10.10.51:9345 check
    server server-3 10.10.10.52:9345 check

backend k8s-api-backend
    mode tcp
    option tcp-check
    balance roundrobin
    default-server inter 10s downinter 5s
    server server-1 10.10.10.50:6443 check
    server server-2 10.10.10.51:6443 check
    server server-3 10.10.10.52:6443 check
----
+
[NOTE]
====
Binding port 6443 is only useful if you want to connect to the API Server through HAProxy.
====

. Add the following to `/etc/keepalived/keepalived.conf` on lb-1 and lb-2:
+
----
global_defs {
  enable_script_security
  script_user root
}

vrrp_script chk_haproxy {
    script 'killall -0 haproxy' # faster than pidof
    interval 2
}

vrrp_instance haproxy-vip {
    interface <INTERFACE> # e.g. eth0
    state <STATE> # MASTER on lb-1, BACKUP on lb-2
    priority <PRIORITY> # 200 on lb-1, 100 on lb-2

    virtual_router_id 51

    virtual_ipaddress {
        10.10.10.100/24
    }

    track_script {
        chk_haproxy
    }
}
----

. Restart HAProxy and Keepalived on lb-1 and lb-2:
+
[,bash]
----
systemctl restart haproxy
systemctl restart keepalived
----

> == Setup the servers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Set up the servers
```

Deploy a xref:install/ha.adoc[HA RKE2 cluster with embedded etcd] on the 3 server nodes.

All server nodes should include the shared token and the load balancer VIP in `tls-san`:

[,yaml]
----
# /etc/rancher/rke2/config.yaml
token: "lb-cluster-gd"
tls-san:
  - "10.10.10.100"
----

For server nodes beyond the first, also set `server: https://10.10.10.100:9345` as shown in the xref:install/ha.adoc[HA installation guide].

.eBPF dataplane
[%collapsible]
======
To enable Calico's eBPF dataplane with the benefits of an HA control plane, add `disable-kube-proxy: true` in the configuration file and use the following HelmChartConfig:

[,yaml]
----
apiVersion: helm.cattle.io/v1
kind: HelmChartConfig
metadata:
  name: rke2-calico
  namespace: kube-system
spec:
  valuesContent: |-
    installation:
      calicoNetwork:
        kubeProxyManagement: Enabled
        linuxDataplane: BPF
    kubernetesServiceEndpoint:
      host: "10.10.10.100"
      port: "6443"
----
======

> == Setup the agents

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Set up the agents
```
